content/posts/001 How to get a directory with a predefined set of files.md, before:

---
title: "How to get a directory with a predefined set of files"
date: 2017-09-18T22:48:46+01:00
draft: false
layout: post
tags: ["ansible"]
slug: "how-to-get-a-directory-with-a-predefined-set-of-files-with-ansible"
---

Sometimes there are files that are leftovers from previous Ansible runs
or have been generated in between Ansible runs by application or some
service. One possible case from the real world is the main config
of nginx `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` that has `include *.conf` statement
at the very end. After installation nginx provides you
with `conf.d/default.conf` that will be included. However one may want
to get rid of this file on production servers.

The first solution would be to explicitly remove this file:


```yml
- name: remove default.conf
  file:
    path: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf"
    state: absent
  notify: reload nginx

```

The problem here is that in fact, none is sure that all pre-defined configs have been removed. As for today, this is enough but tomorrow package maintainers may add other files that silently are added to your production system during installation.

The second solution would be to remove all files from `/etc/nginx/conf.d` and then add only the necessary ones:

```yml
- name: remove all from conf.d
    shell: "rm -rf /etc/nginx/conf.d/*.conf"
    notify: reload nginx

- name: add required configs
    copy:
      src: "{{ item }}"
      dest: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/{{ item }}"
    with_items: "{{ nginx_configs }}"
    notify: reload nginx
```

The problem here is that event `reload nginx` is triggered every time regardless of the presence of real changes. In other words, the playbook will not be idempotent any more.

The third approach would be to remove all files that are not in the "white list":

```yml
- name: get list of files from the directory
  find:
    paths: "/etc/nginx/conf.d"
    file_type: file
    hidden: true
  register: _dir_files

- name: remove files that are not on the list
  file:
    path: "{{ item.path }}"
    state: absent
  when: "item.path | basename not in nginx_configs | default([])"
  with_items: "{{ _dir_files.files | default([]) }}"
  notify: reload nginx

- name: add required configs
  copy:
    src: "{{ item }}"
    dest: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/{{ item }}"
  with_items: "{{ nginx_configs }}"
  notify: reload nginx

```

This returns idempotency back because it triggers `reload nginx` event only when real changes were made.

I do not consider this solution to be ideal but this snippet may be used in some cases.

Commit message:

Improve spelling and modify description

content/posts/001 How to get a directory with a predefined set of files.md, after:

---
title: "How to get a directory with a predefined set of files"
date: 2017-09-18T22:48:46+01:00
draft: false
layout: post
tags: ["ansible"]
slug: "how-to-get-a-directory-with-a-predefined-set-of-files-with-ansible"
description: >
    Sometimes there are files that are leftovers from previous Ansible playbook executions or were
    generated in between Ansible executions by the application. In this case,
    it is hard to predict what final version of config will be generated after running ansible once again
---

Sometimes there are files that are leftovers from previous Ansible playbook executions or were
generated in between Ansible executions by the application. In this case,
it is hard to predict what final version of config will be generated after running ansible once again.
One possible case from the real world is the main config
of nginx `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` that has `include *.conf` statement
at the very end. After installation nginx provides you
with `conf.d/default.conf` that will be included. However one may want
to get rid of this file on production servers.

The first solution would be to explicitly remove this file:


```yml
- name: remove default.conf
  file:
    path: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf"
    state: absent
  notify: reload nginx

```

The problem here is that in fact, none is sure that all pre-defined configs have been removed. As for today, this is enough but tomorrow package maintainers may add other files that silently are added to your production system during installation.

The second solution would be to remove all files from `/etc/nginx/conf.d` and then add only the necessary ones:

```yml
- name: remove all from conf.d
    shell: "rm -rf /etc/nginx/conf.d/*.conf"
    notify: reload nginx

- name: add required configs
    copy:
      src: "{{ item }}"
      dest: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/{{ item }}"
    with_items: "{{ nginx_configs }}"
    notify: reload nginx
```

The problem here is that event `reload nginx` is triggered every time regardless of the presence of real changes. In other words, the playbook will not be idempotent any more.

The third approach would be to remove all files that are not in the "white list":

```yml
- name: get list of files from the directory
  find:
    paths: "/etc/nginx/conf.d"
    file_type: file
    hidden: true
  register: _dir_files

- name: remove files that are not on the list
  file:
    path: "{{ item.path }}"
    state: absent
  when: "item.path | basename not in nginx_configs | default([])"
  with_items: "{{ _dir_files.files | default([]) }}"
  notify: reload nginx

- name: add required configs
  copy:
    src: "{{ item }}"
    dest: "/etc/nginx/conf.d/{{ item }}"
  with_items: "{{ nginx_configs }}"
  notify: reload nginx

```

This returns idempotency back because it triggers `reload nginx` event only when real changes were made.

I do not consider this solution to be ideal but this snippet may be used in some cases.
